Write README (#1)
trixi-framework/talk-2022-juliacon_toolchain: README.md

# JuliaCon 2022: From Mesh Generation to Adaptive Simulation: A Journey in Julia

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-success.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hoViWRAhCBE" target="_blank" rel="noopener noreferrer"><img
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/25242486/176432903-668ce8bf-4119-4d15-a46e-a1df90944e14.png"
    width="500px" /></a>
</p>

This is the companion repository for the [JuliaCon 2022](https://juliacon.org/2022) talk

**From Mesh Generation to Adaptive Simulation: A Journey in Julia**<br>
*Andrew R. Winters*<br>

(see abstract [below](#abstract)). Here you can find the presentation slides
in [talk.pdf](talk.pdf) as well as Julia scripts in the [examples](examples/)
directory to locally create results of mesh generation with
[HOHQMesh.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/HOHQMesh.jl)
and [Trixi.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/Trixi.jl) simulations
presented in the talk.

To reduce the size of the file for the [talk.pdf](talk.pdf), the video is not
embedded. Instead, the video `cylinder_flow_sine_walls.mp4` shown in the

> presentation is located in [media](media/).

Reviewer: The movie doesn't play in browser due to size. If you have a Youtube link, might be good to add here as well.

Author: That is a good point. I plan to upload the video to YouTube the week of JuliaCon, so i can add a link after that.

Author: I opened an issue #2 to remind me to add the YouTube links

Author: It is on YouTube now and I will add the link. Should I remove the actual movie file from the repo?

Reviewer: I think yeah, saves some space.

## Abstract

We present a Julia toolchain for the adaptive simulation of hyperbolic PDEs

> such as flow equations on complex domains. It begins with HOHQMesh.jl to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
such as flow equations on complex domains. It begins with using HOHQMesh.jl to
```

in Trixi.jl, like adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) or shock capturing,
useful for practical applications with complex transient behavior.

### More detailed description

Applications of interest in computational fluid mechanics typically occur
on domains with curved boundaries. Further, the solution of a non-linear
physical model can develop complex phenomena such as discontinuities,
singularities, and turbulence.

Attacking such complex flow problems may seem daunting. In this talk,
however, we present a toolchain with components entirely available in
the Julia ecosystem to do just that. In broad strokes the workflow is:

1. Use [HOHQMesh.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/HOHQMesh.jl)
   to interactively prototype and visualize a domain with curved boundaries.
2. HOHQMesh generates an all quadrilateral mesh amenable for high-order numerical
   methods.
3. The mesh file is passed to [Trixi.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/Trixi.jl),
   a numerical simulation framework for conservation laws.
4. Solution-adaptive refinement of the mesh within Trixi is handled by
   [P4est.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/P4est.jl).

> 5. After the simulation, a first visualization is made with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. After the simulation, interactive visualization can be done using
```

   [Makie.jl](https://makie.juliaplots.org/stable/).
6. Solution data can also be exported with
   [Trixi2Vtk.jl](https://github.com/trixi-framework/Trixi2Vtk.jl)
   for visualization in
   external software like [ParaView](https://www.paraview.org/).

The strength and simplicity of this workflow is through the combination
of several packages either originally written in Julia, like Trixi.jl,
or wrappers, like P4est.jl or HOHQMesh.jl, that provide Julia users access
to powerful, well-developed numerical libraries and tools written in other
programming languages.

## Getting started

### Installing Julia
To obtain Julia, go to https://julialang.org/downloads/ and download the latest
stable release (v1.7.3 as of 2022-06-28; neither use the LTS release nor

> Julia Pro). Then, follow the

Reviewer: "neither use the LTS release nor Julia Pro" is a bit confusing. What does this mean?

Author: I am just warning people to not use either of these Julia "flavors". Mostly from personal experience, JuliaPro caused a lot of funniness when I first started learning Julia.

Reviewer: Can we reword it "for example, Trixi may not work with the JuliaPro distribution or the LTS release" (which I think is version 1.6.3 now?).

Author: I read earlier today that JuliaPro was [basically discontinued](https://discourse.julialang.org/t/is-juliapro-discontinued/67670/2). Also because I think Atom is dying. We can still add something like the above to be cautious of it as well as the LTS release.

Reviewer: Sounds good. We also note Trixi needs Julia 1.7 so the LTS warning isn't strictly necessary (but might be nice to include).

Author: Done I added a short rearranged version of the sentence above that you posted.

[platform-specific instructions](https://julialang.org/downloads/platform/)
to install Julia on your machine. Note that there is no need to compile anything
if you are using Linux, MacOS, or Windows.

After the installation, open a terminal and start the Julia *REPL*
(i.e., the interactive prompt) with
```shell
julia
```

### Installing the required Julia packages
To run the scripts in the [examples](examples/) directory and allow for
fully reproducible results, we have used Julia's package manager

> to pin all packages to a fixed release. This ensures that you always have a
> Julia environment in which all the results presented were created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to pin all packages to a fixed release. This makes it straightforward to
reproduce the Julia environment in which all the results presented were created.
```

and `Manifest.toml` files from this repository to figure out which packages to install.

Once the initialization and installation is complete you must start Julia with the
`--project` flag set to your local clone of this repository
```shell
julia --project=@.
```

## Mesh created with tools from HOHQMesh.jl
To reproduce the figures and create the mesh file output execute from the REPL
```julia
include(joinpath("examples", "interactive_cylinder_with_sine_walls.jl"))
```
This will create the directory `out` where the mesh file is saved.

## Simulation with Trixi.jl
The elixir file described in the presentation to setup and run a simulation
of Mach 2 flow over a cylinder is `elixir_euler_mach2_cylinder.jl`.
To run the simulation up to a final time of 0.5, execute from the REPL
```julia
using Trixi
trixi_include(joinpath("examples", "elixir_euler_mach2_cylinder.jl"), tspan=(0.0,0.5))
```
where the final time is adjusted within the `trixi_include` call.
This simulation to the final time 0.5 takes approximately 20 minutes on a single thread.
To visualize the solution `sol` at the final time execute
```julia
using GLMakie
pd = PlotData2D(sol)
plot(pd["rho"])
```

## Combined script

> The script `build_mesh_and_run_mach2_cylinder.jl` executes the entire toolchain

Reviewer: These scripts seem to contain a lot of repeated code. Is it possible to just write the "build mesh" and "run Trixi" scripts and then call them each sequentially for the "combined" script?

Author: That's a good point. I could just `include` the two scripts and then the `Trixi2Vtk` and `plot` calls are the only new things in the complete script.

Author: This really helped clean up the complete script. Now if you exclude my comments and print statements the entire tool chain takes about 6 lines of code ;)

Reviewer: Awesome! Glad to hear.

described in the talk. That is, the script generates the mesh, runs the simulation,
visualizes the final result in Makie, and converts the output files to VTK format

> using Trixi2Vtk and saves them to the `plot_files` directory. Execute this script with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
visualizes the final result in Makie, converts the output files to VTK format
using Trixi2Vtk, and saves them to the `plot_files` directory. Execute this script with
```

```julia
include(joinpath("examples", "build_mesh_and_run_mach2_cylinder.jl"))
```

As written, this script sets `tspan = (0.0, 0.0)` on line 183. This can be adjusted
to take a different final time, e.g., the final time for the video in [media](media/)
is 2.25.

> To reproduce the ParaView visualization first open ParaView (after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To reproduce the ParaView visualization, first open ParaView (after
```
